#title AmuseWiki: a library oriented wiki engine (talk)
#lang en
#SORTauthors Marco Pessotto
#author Marco Pessotto (melmothX)
#date September 3, 2015, Granada
#slides no

*** Scenario

 - Digital library with more than 2000 texts, including full-length books
 - Long term archiving (not fire and forget texts), control revision
 - Quality output required (read: LaTeX output)
 - Imposing of PDF for home-printing
 - EPUB output for mobile devices
 - Preference for a flat file storage (like ikiwiki or MoinMoin)
 - Creation of collections (like on mediawiki)
 - One-man project

*** The lightweight markup

 - No standard, even if Markdown seems to be the winner (but with dialects)
 - Emacs Muse: project kind of dead, but the markup is compact and
   expressive, documented, and has a reference implementation.
   [[https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs-muse/]]
 - Some incompatibilities have been introduced, but they are
   documented (to address corner cases where the syntax can be
   confusing).
 - Bottom line: all these markups are easy to use and it takes 5
   minutes to learn one of them, as long as it is documented.

*** Our own dialect of Emacs Muse
 - Manual: [[http://www.amusewiki.org/library/manual]]
 - Module: [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::Amuse][=Text::Amuse=]] (produces LaTeX and HTML)
 - Ill-suited for technical papers, though. No math support, no syntax
   highlight, but well-suited for general prose and even poetry.
 - It has every feature one could expect from a lightweight markup:
   images, sectioning, footnotes, simple tables, bold, italics,
   subscript, superscript, lists, verbatim, quotations.
 - So far proved itself good and expressive.

*** Importing

 - Legacy library had the texts in filtered HTML
 - People usually have the texts in Word format or copy and paste from
   HTML pages
 - The javascript HTML editor =CKEditor= has a “paste from Word” feature
   [[http://ckeditor.com/]]
 - Need to convert the HTML to Muse, preserving as much as possible
   the logical structure of the document (and discarding the noise).
 - Need some common search-and-replace patterns (like typographical
   quotes, text cleaning).
 - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::Amuse::Preprocessor][=Text::Amuse::Preprocessor=]]

*** Compiling

 - Templating for output: [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Template::Tiny][=Template::Tiny=]]
 - PDF generation: =XeLaTeX=  (Unicode aware, system fonts)
 - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/EBook::EPUB][=EBook::EPUB=]] using =Text::Amuse=’s splat HTML output
 - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/PDF::Imposition][=PDF::Imposition=]] (written for this project but it’s a general
   purpose module): put logical pages into a physical page according
   to a schema (for booklets and home printing)
 - All the above glued together by [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::Amuse::Compile][=Text::Amuse::Compile=]]
 - =muse-compile.pl= script is shipped with =Text::Amuse::Compile=, so you
   can generate the formats from the command line.

*** Data storage

 - Texts themselves are self-contained. All the information describing
   the text (like author, title, categories) is stored in the header
   of the text. 1 text (even a whole book), 1 file.
 - Texts are stored in a Git archive
 - Git integration on the site with =cgit=:
   [[http://www.amusewiki.org/git/amw/]]
 - Full text search: Xapian (light, fast, fairly simple to setup, well
   integrated in Perl with [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Search::Xapian][=Search::Xapian=]]).
 - Database integration: [[https://metacpan.org/pod/DBIx::Class][=DBIx::Class=]]

*** Web backend

 - A daemon takes care of all the operations which are slow or somehow
   delicate where concurrent access could be a problem (text
   compilation, publication, indexing, Git interaction).
 - Formats are pregenerated, including the HTML. The frontend just
   serves them.
 - The backend and the frontend communicate via a job queue in the
   database.
 - Some message queue systems were examined, but resorted to use the
   database because it was the most straightforward and other
   solutions looked like over-engineering.


*** Web Frontend

 - Catalyst application: chaining, method-to-uri mapping, actively
   developed, great community, back-compatibility approach.
 - Plack-able application (currently deployed via nginx + FCGI)
 - Template: [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Template][Template Toolkit]]
 - Localization via [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Catalyst::Plugin::I18N][=Catalyst::Plugin::I18N=]] (plus local overriding
   via local JSON file).
 - Localized for English, Italian, Croatian, Macedonian, Russian,
   Finnish, Swedish, German.
 - Multisite: on one instance you can run as many sites as you want
   (this was the most compelling argument to write AmuseWiki).

*** User management

 - Kept at minimum reusing existing solutions.
    - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Catalyst::Plugin::Authentication][=Catalyst::Plugin::Authentication=]]
    - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/Catalyst::Plugin::Authorization::Roles][=Catalyst::Plugin::Authorization::Roles=]]
    - [[https://metacpan.org/pod/DBIx::Class::PassphraseColumn][=DBIx::Class::PassphraseColumn=]]

 - No hierarchical structure: each librarian can create other peer
   librarians (plus root for site management) with the same level of
   privileges.

 - Modes:
    - private site
    - blog site (only logged-in can edit)
    - moderated wiki (approval required)
    - open wiki (undertested)

*** The Bookbuilder

The basic idea is like the Wikimedia’s book creator, but with goodies.
Features:

 - LaTeX output
 - Font selection
 - Paper size selection
 - Imposition schema selection
 - Cover images upload
 - Custom files are compiled by the backend, even if the users sees
   the live logs and the process is pretty fast.
 - EPUB output if required, with embedded fonts.
 - A basic question to keep robots away (probably will not scale, but
   so far works well)


*** Some time left?

If we have some more time and no questions...

*** The past

 - Drupal + filtered HTML, texts kept in sync on a local Git repo with
   scripts. Obviously it wasn’t a brilliant idea, to be generous.
 - Same filtered HTML inherited from Drupal, plus home-brewed CGI
   scripts. It kind of worked.
 - Dancer application and Emacs Muse markup, no database. Worked, but
   didn’t scale with multisite.

*** The future

 - A better installer
 - Teasers
 - Decorative images
